At one point in my life, I was a fairly prolific writer. I journaled, I wrote short stories, just scenes, really, and I wrote letters to people. Over the past few years, the most I've written has been some emails, Confluence pages full of technical documentation, and thanks in large part to my mentor, Bob Ballantyne, a couple of patent proposals. In light of my current situation, I feel like I have something that I want to say again, and so I come back to writing.

It's been 6 months since I was laid off after 15 years at Dell Technologies. Surprising even myself, I'm really not bitter or angry about the situation. I am grateful for my time spent there, and for my coworkers who have been outstanding over the years. The time away, and the self-reflection required as part of the job search process has given me some distance and perspective on my own professional weaknesses. I've been working on these through training and certifications, as well as efforts to improve my productivity patterns.

Yet what I haven't done as aggressively is to look at and articulate my own strenghts. This is common, I expect. I've never liked doing self-evaluations, and have always erred toward humility rather than touting my own achievements. I would rather let others do that for me, but in that I'm doing myself a disservice. It's vital, especially when faced with an unplanned job search in a difficult market, to be able to clearly state one's own value proposition, and lay out the ways that you can benefit potential employers.

Last week, I attended the Downtown Techies Meetup in Raleigh, a group of professionals who just get together once a month to meet others, and share a beverage after work. It was my first time attending, and I was happy to run into one or two people that I already knew. Even better, I met a number of new people, which is clearly the point of the event, and where the real benefit lies. Perhaps miraculously, in one such interaction, I learned something about myself.

I was speaking with a gentleman, a few years younger than myself, who described himself as a startup consultant. He works with startups to guide them in defining and building their businesses. He told me a bit about what he does, and a few of the companies he works with, and then he asked about me. I gave him my elevator pitch, which I've been honing for a while, but then he asked me something different. What part of my work did I like the best?

In a moment of clarity, I was able to say something that I've never considered before in such terms, but which I realize is spot-on: I'm a "yes, and" guy.

Folks who know anything about improv comedy know that the "yes, and" technique is a fundamental principle. The idea is to build off of someone else's thoughts and ideas, and to add your own. It's a way of creating something new and unique, while still honoring the contributions of others. It's a way of being open to new ideas, and of being willing to take risks. It's a positive growth mindset as well, when applied correctly. He immediately recognized the concept, and seemed intrigued enough to ask me more about it. I gave a few examples of how I've used the practice in past, and how it benefited the projects I worked on. I was feeling pretty good about the way I handled the situation.

Then my new aquaintance took it further: Being a "yes, and" guy, how do I handle the need for a minimum viable product (MVP)? Ok, now this is tougher.

I thought about how being a "yes, and" person can be the proverbial double-edged sword. While it allows for and even fosters innovation, it can easily lead to project over-reach, scope creep, blown deadlines, and never-ending cycles of letting the perfect be the enemy of the good. I had to say that this is why agile thinking, well-groomed backlogs, and consistent sprint planning are essential tools to allow for the delivery of an MVP, while still allowing for the "yes, and" mentality to thrive. By embracing the "yes, and" approach, but tempering it with disciplined project management, we can foster a culture of continuous improvement and innovation, while also ensuring that our projects stay focused and aligned with our goals.

I love being the "yes, and" guy. It's served me very well over my career, and I am looking forward to bringing that mentality to my next engagement. Yet now that I've been able to vocalize this truth about myself, and express it as a strength, I am confident that I can make better and more intentional use of this skill going forward. And I'm updating that elevator pitch with this in mind.